THERE was no possibility of taking a walk that day. We had been wandering, indeed, in the l
eafless shrubbery an hour in the morning; but since dinner (Mrs. Reed, when there was n
o company, dined early) the cold winter wind had brought with it clouds so 
sombre, and a rain so penetrating, that further outdoor exercise was now out of the question. I was glad of it: 
I never liked long walks, especially on chilly afternoons: dreadful to me was the coming home in the raw twilig
ht, with nipped fingers and toes, and a heart saddened by the chidings of Bessie, the nurse, and humbled by the
 consciousness of my physical inferiority to Eliza, John, and Georgiana Reed. The said Eliza, John, and Georgian
a were now clustered round their mama in the drawing-room: she lay reclined on a sofa by the fireside, and with
 her darlings about her (for the time neither quarrelling nor crying) looked perfectly happy. Me, she had dispen
sed from joining the group; saying, 'She regretted to be under the necessity of keeping me at a distance; but t
hat until she heard from Bessie, and could discover by her own observation, that I was endeavouring in good ea
rnest to acquire a more sociable and childlike disposition, a more attractive and sprightly manner- something 
lighter, franker, more natural, as it were- she really must exclude me from privileges intended onl
y for contented, happy, little children.' 
'What does Bessie say I have done?' I asked.
'Jane, I don't like cavillers or question
ers; besides, there is something truly forbidding 
in a child taking up her elders in that manner. Be seat
ed somewhere; and until you can speak pleasantly, remain silent.' 
IVE o'clock had hardly struck on the morning of the 19th of January, when Bessie brought a candle into 
my closet and found me already up and nearly dressed. I had risen half an hour before her entrance, and ha
d washed my face, and put on my clothes by the light of a half-moon just setting, whose rays streamed th
rough the narrow window near my crib. I was to leave Gateshead that day by a coach which passed the lodge gates at six A.M. Bessie was the only person yet risen; she had lit a fire in the nursery, where she now proceeded to make my breakfast. Few children can eat when excited with the thoughts of a journey; nor could I. Bessie, having pressed me in vain to take a few spoonfuls of the boiled milk and bread she had prepared for me, wrapped up some biscuits in a paper and put them into my bag; then she helped me on with my pelisse and bonnet, and wrapping herself in a shawl, she and I left the nursery. As we passed Mrs. Reed's bedroom, she said, 'Will you go in and bid Missis good-bye?' 
'No, Bessie: she came to my crib last night when you were gone down to supper, and said I need not disturb 
her in the morning, or my cousins either; and she told me to remember that she had always been my best friend, a
nd to speak of her and be grateful to her accordingly.'
'What did you say, Miss?'
'Nothing: I covered my face with the bedclothes, and turned from her to the wall.'
'That was wrong, Miss Jane.'
'It was quite right, Bessie. Your Missis has not been my friend: she has been my foe.'
'O Miss Jane! don't say so!'
'Good-bye to Gateshead!' cried I, as we passed through the hall and went out at the front door.
The moon was set, and it was very dark; Bessie carried a lantern, whose light glanced on wet steps and 
gravel road sodden by a recent thaw. Raw and chill was the winter morning: my teeth chattered as I hastene
d down the drive. There was a light in the porter's lodge: when we reached it, we found the porter's wife 
just kindling her fire: my trunk, which had been carried down the evening before, stood corded at the door. 
It wanted but a few minutes of six, and shortly after that hour had struck, the distant roll of wheels anno
unced the coming coach; I went to the door and watched its lamps approach rapidly through the gloom.
'Is she going by herself?' asked the porter's wife.